CIVmasterLib - a Library for communication via ICOM's CI-V bus
Created by Wilfried Dilling, DK8RW, May 04, 2022
Released into the public domain


Basics (SW / HW / Radio settings)

This is the implementation of a part of ICOM's CIV-Bus protocol as far as it's needed
for the current tasks (e.g. sending some commands to an ICOM radio when changing modes
from digital to analog), reading the frequency, modulation mode/filter or switching the radio on or off.

The command set, however, can be easily adapted/enhanced by anybody in the file 
CIVcmds.h according to ICOM's user manual(s).
But please be careful - if the FW Version in a specific radio is not up to date, commands
may be described in the user manual which in reality are not accepted by the radio !

The SW CIVmaster and ICradio is intended to be run as a "CI-V MASTER" on Arduino boards (incl. ESp32).

The baudrate has to be set in the radio's menu to the CIV_BAUDRATE as defined in CIVmaster.h 
Default in the Radio would be "Auto", which doesn't work reliably.

The CI-V HW interface connects to a serial port (RX/TX) of the arduino.
With Arduino Mega RX1/TX1 and with ESP32 RX2/TX2 pins are used automatically.
If no independent HW serial port is available (e.g. in Arduino UNO, NANO, PRO, PRO MINI) 
a SW-Emulation "AltSoftSerial" is used (Arduino Pins 8 and 9).
The new ICOM radio IC-705 does not provide an HW CI-V interface any more. However, the SW / command structure
of the CI-V-interface is implemented and easily accessible via BluetoothSerial (classic).
For accessing this Bluetooth interface you have to use an ESP32 and tell the library to use Bluetooth instead of 
the Serial 2 interface(default). This is done by passing "true" to the setupp-method of the class CIV.

"Asynchronous reading", i.e. "CI-V broadcast messages" sent by the radio :

This feature can be switched on or off in the menu of the ICOM transceivers.
("CI-V Transceive" in the radio's menu, which is ON by default)

Support of "Asynchronous reading" is supported. If the method readMsg is called cyclic
in the main loop (approx. every 20 .. 100ms) the messages sent from the radio will be 
gathered, checked and made available for interpretation.
If ICradio is used in combination with civ, this will be supported automatically 
by the ICradio-class.


SW to be run on a CI-V master controlling ICOM radios

	a.  CIV (CIV can be used standalone, i.e. independently from ICradio)

			These are the low level drivers (read and write) for the CI-V interface.
			They can be used independently from ICradio for any purpose possible
			depending on the implementation in the different ICOM radios
			
			The CIV class is very universal by principle !!

	b.	ICradio (ICradio needs, i.e. builds up on CIV)
			This is the implementation of some high level features of the radios
			like "switch the radio on or off" or "get the frequency in use".
			Creating an instance based on the ICradio class sets the CI-V address and
			the ICradio_type in use.

			The instance "knows" the specialities of the different types of radio and
			handles them automatically correct based on "_radioType". 

			One of these "specialities" is e.g. the clock setting in IC7300.
			The clock of the IC7300 will be set every time after the radio is switched on 
			(since at least my IC7300 looses the time information every time, when it is
			switched off).
			
			ICradio can be used very convenientely as long as the implemented feature set is sufficient
			for the needs of the user. If not, the CIV class has to be used in addition (in parallel)
			or instead of the ICradio class. 


Implementation details (CIV)

write to CIV bus (writeMsg):

1. check, whether the bus is clear

  At the moment, when the bus shall be taken over in order to write a message,
	several states of the bus are possible: 

	a. no bytes in rxbuffer; this is the normal case and ideal! The bus 
		 is clear and the master can immediately take over the bus by
     transmitting the start byte.

	b. there are bytes received and stored in the rxBuffer. In this case it will
		 try to read the complete command and store it away.

	If there is no change of the situation after that (i.e. there are still 
	bytes available in inbuffer) the transmission will be stopped and an error thrown

2. build the buffer and transmit the bytes 
   (only into buffer of the serial interface -> fast, approx. 60us in total, 
   tested with AltSoftSerial on Arduino UNO)

3. wait for end of transmission and check success of this transmission
   In this part, the processor has to wait until the cmd has really been sent.
   Then the transmitted byes are checked if one or more have been corrupted 
   by a bus conflict.
   This takes approx. 5ms for 19200Bd / 11 bytes

Depending on the requirements, part 3 may be omitted in order to save time. 

Regarding waiting times...
  Given a speed of 19200Bd and 10Bits/byte the transmission of a 
  byte takes 0,52ms. If a command consists of approx 8 bytes in the average, 
  a complete CIV command takes approx 4,1ms
  therefore a waiting time of 5ms seems to be reasonable ...


read from CIV bus (readMsgRaw and readMsg):

	read routine (readMsgRaw):
		Check, whether there are Bytes in the inbuffer - if not, then return asap.
		This takes only 10us !
	
		If bytes are available, the processing of the incoming message can start. 
		However, usually processing the data (storing in rxBuffer) is much 
		faster than the delivery of the bytes via the bus.
		Therefore the rx procedure has to take care of the fact, that the incoming data 
		stream may pause a bit and shall continue, until the C_stop byte 
		signals the "command complete".
		This must not take forever, so after a defined maximum waiting time (t_readMsg) the procedure 
		has to stop and break, signaling an error.

	read routine (readMsg):

		readMsg is building up on readMsgRaw

		In a system with more than one radio objects on the SW side (e.g. two instances of ICradio 
		like IC7300 and IC9700) and two corresponding radios connected to the CI-V bus on the HW side,
		it could happen that instance one (IC7300) is trying to read from the bus, but there is only a message for the
		instance two (IC9700) available.
		In this case the message for IC9700 has to be stored temporarily, and the result given back
		to IC7300 is "no message available".
		In case of "buffer full" no incoming message is fetched from the CI-V bus until the buffer 
		has been read out.

